---
title: 'Multi-tenant databases with Laravel Jetstream'
excerpt: 'How to guide on adapting a Laravel Spark installation'
author:
  - f3c206c3-0a44-407e-be25-fad6f9aabe36
updated_by: f3c206c3-0a44-407e-be25-fad6f9aabe36
updated_at: 1599938932
id: 85835e4c-4602-4be0-b78b-d754a2063c85
published: false
---
Laravel Jetstream is the latest in a long line of fantastic first-party open source packages from Taylor and the (growing) Laravel team. Jetstream includes an option to add team functionality to your app, (really useful for SaaS apps!).  This article is going to walk you through how to adapt a Jetstream enabled Laravel app to use multii-tenant databases.

### What is the Teams Feature?

The teams functionality has been extracted and improved from the premium product Laravel Spark.   

### Why Multi-Tenant Databases

...



### Database Connections

We need two database connections: one for the 'landlord' database and for the 'tenant'.

1. Duplicate the default `mysql` connection and rename this to `tenant`.  
2. Rename the `mysql` connection to `landlord`
3. Change the database name of the `landlord` connection:
```php
'database' => env('DB_LANDLORD_DATABASE', 'myapp_landlord'),
```
4. In your .env file replace the `DB_DATABASE` environment variable like so:
```
DB_LANDLORD_DATABASE=getpaid2_landlord
DB_TENANT_DATABASE_PREFIX=getpaid2_
```
5. Set default connection to the landlord database:
```
DB_CONNECTION=landlord
```


### Migrations

Publish the landlord migration from the Spatie package.

```sh
php artisan vendor:publish --provider="Spatie\Multitenancy\MultitenancyServiceProvider" --tag="migrations"
```

This migration will be published to `database/migrations/landlord`. From now one, the `database/migrations` directory will be used exclusively for the tenant migrations.  Assuming you have a clean Laravel 8+ Jetstream installation, move all the migrations to the new landlord directory.  If you are working on an existing application you will need to decide which migrations should be moved to the landlord directory.  As a general rule anything related to the framework should be in the landlord directory e.g. teams, users, failed jobs, personal acceess tokens.  Application data for a tenant should not be in the landlord schema.

Before we migrate the database we need to make a couple of modifications:
* Remove the domain column, it is unnecessary as we are using Jetstream to select the tenant.
* Add a team_id column to relate the tenant to a team

```php
$table->foreignId('team_id')->constrained()->cascadeOnDelete();
```

### Migrate the landlord database

```sh
php artisan migrate --path=database/migrations/landlord --database=landlord
```

### Configuration

First we need to publish the base configuration file.
```sh
php artisan vendor:publish --provider="Spatie\Multitenancy\MultitenancyServiceProvider" --tag="config"
```

Specify the connections names to use:
```php
    'landlord_database_connection_name' => 'landlord',
    'tenant_database_connection_name' => 'tenant',
```

We need to use the provided `SwitchTenantDatabaseTask`:
```php
	'switch_tenant_tasks' => [
        \Spatie\Multitenancy\Tasks\SwitchTenantDatabaseTask::class,
    ],
```

### Models

We need to add a relationship to the tenant model from the Team model.  Whilst we are here we can the trait `UsesLandlordConnection`.  The `User` model should have this trait as well.

```php
// ...
use Spatie\Multitenancy\Models\Concerns\UsesLandlordConnection;
use Spatie\Multitenancy\Models\Tenant;

class Team extends JetstreamTeam
{
	use UsesLandlordConnection;
    

	// ...
	
    public function tenant(): HasOne
    {
        return $this->hasOne(Tenant::class, 'team_id');
    }
}
```

Add the `UsesTenantConnection` to the models which should live in the in the tenant databases.


### Creating a tenant database

The Spatie package is deliberately unopionated and therefore doens't provide a mechanism for creating the tenant databases. As we are using Jetstream to provide our appication with team functionality we need to create a tenant database when a team is created.  Fortunately, Jetstream provides a perfect event we can listen for.

I highly recommend you use a queued listener for this. If something goes wrong creating the tenant database it will be easier to retry.

```
php artisan make:listener --queued --event="\\Laravel\\Jetstream\\Events\\TeamCreated" CreateTenantForTeam
```

Use this snippet for the handle method of the listener:

```php
	public function handle(TeamCreated $event)
    {
        $tenant = Tenant::query()->firstOrCreate([
            'name' => $event->team->name,
            'team_id' => $event->team->id,
        ]);

        $databaseName = sprintf('tenant_%05d', $tenant->id);

        // create if database does not exist
        DB::unprepared("CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS $databaseName;");

        Artisan::call("tenants:artisan --tenant={$tenant->id} -- \"migrate --database=tenant\"");

        $tenant->update([
            'database' => $databaseName
        ]);
    }
```

Register the listener in your `EventServiceProvider`:

```php
	protected $listen = [
        // ...
        \Laravel\Jetstream\Events\TeamCreated::class => [
            CreateTenantForTeam::class
        ]
    ];
```

### Use middleware to select the current tenant

The Spatie provides a mechanism for [automatically determining the current tenant](https://spatie.be/docs/laravel-multitenancy/v1/basic-usage/automatically-determining-the-current-tenant) but this approach won't work with Jetstream as the code is executed during booting of the application.  A sensible approach is to use middleware that runs after the session has been started.

```php
/** insert middleware code here **/
```

Now register this middleware:

```php
	protected $routeMiddleware = [
    	// ...
        'tenant' => \App\Http\Middleware\DetermineCurrentTenant::class,
	];
```

Finally, use the new middleware for all authenticated routes.  A route group